A timely and accurate heart failure diagnosis 
is the gateway to effective treatment that 
can improve quality of life and prognosis 
for patients;1 however, almost 80% of 
people receive an initial diagnosis following 
emergency admission to hospital.2 This is 
distressing for patients and families, costly 
to the NHS, and usually denotes progression 
to a later stage of disease. The British Heart 
Foundation has called for earlier diagnosis 
of heart failure to be prioritised,3 but what 
are the challenges for primary care?
HEART FAILURE BURDEN
Around a million people in England 
are living with heart failure, and nearly 
200 000 are newly diagnosed each year.4 
Patients typically experience increasing 
breathlessness, fatigue, and leg swelling, 
which can impair their quality of life. The 
outlook following a heart failure diagnosis 
is worse than many common cancers 
and survival rates have not improved 
substantially in the last two decades.5 The 
NHS spends around £2 billion per year on 
heart failure care, with most of the cost 
incurred through emergency department 
attendance, prolonged hospital stay, and 
frequent readmissions.1 Families and 
carers are also impacted and can often play 
a vital role in supporting patients following 
diagnosis.
TREATABLE CONDITION
Heart failure is categorised according to 
left ventricular ejection fraction to guide 
management: heart failure with reduced 
ejection fraction (HFrEF) and heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction 
(HFpEF).1 There is a substantial evidence 
base for HFrEF treatments, such as 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, 
beta-?blockers, and mineralocorticoid 
receptor antagonists, which can improve 
quality of life, reduce hospital admissions, 
and increase survival. Newer drugs 
such as sacubitril/valsartan, ivabradine, 
and most recently sodium-?glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, are 
also available for specialist initiation. 
Prognostically beneficial treatments for 
HFpEF have been limited until recently 
when SGLT2 inhibitors dapagliflozin and 
empagliflozin showed promising results in 
clinical trials.6 Treatment of valvular heart 
disease and arrhythmias is also important 
if a correctable cause of heart failure is 
found. For all types of heart failure, diuretic 
therapy is vital to relieve fluid overload.
NATRIURETIC PEPTIDE TESTING
The National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence (NICE) chronic heart 
failure guideline recommends that 
patients presenting to primary care with 
symptoms suggestive of heart failure 
undergo natriuretic peptide testing.1 B-type 
natriuretic peptide (BNP) and NT-proBNP 
are both clinically available and perform 
similarly for diagnosis.7 If the natriuretic 
peptide level is raised, the patient requires 
referral for echocardiography and further 
assessment by a specialist to confirm the 
diagnosis of heart failure. Thresholds for 
referral differ between European and NICE 
guidelines, and this is further explored in 
our accompanying diagnostic accuracy 
study in this edition of the BJGP .8 A very 
high natriuretic peptide level is associated 
with an increased risk of hospitalisation and 
worse prognosis, so NICE recommends 
patients with a NT-proBNP level >2000 ng/L 
be seen within 2 weeks, and all patients 
with a NT-proBNP >400  ng/L be seen 
within 6 weeks.1
DIAGNOSTIC DELAYS
The pathway to heart failure diagnosis is complex, however, and dependent on 
patient, clinician, and system factors 
that can lead to delays. The mean age at 
diagnosis is 77 years, and most patients 
have other long-term conditions and take 
several medications.4 The main symptoms 
of heart failure are also common, with a 
variety of causes, and awareness of the 
condition among the public is limited. 
Qualitative interviews with people recently 
diagnosed with heart failure found 
participants ‘normalised’ symptoms such 
as breathlessness, putting it down to old 
age or another condition, which led to a 
delay in accessing medical services.9 The 
term ‘heart failure’ itself was perceived to 
be frightening and often misunderstood.
There is also evidence of delays between 
patients first presenting to primary care 
with symptoms and subsequent referral 
to specialist services.10 Clinicians may 
initially link common symptoms such as 
breathlessness to existing disorders (for 
example, lung disease) and optimise 
management before considering an 
alternative diagnosis. A normal natriuretic 
peptide level can be helpful to rule out a 
heart failure diagnosis but universal access 
to rapid testing is needed. A recent large 
study using primary care data to analyse 
trends in natriuretic peptide testing between 
2004 and 2018 showed testing increased 
during the study period, with NT-proBNP 
being the favoured test. However, only one 
in four patients had a natriuretic peptide test 
prior to heart failure diagnosis.11 
There are also capacity issues in 
echocardiography services, and analysis of 
primary care data showed that timeframes 
recommended by NICE for patients to 
receive a formal heart failure diagnosis 
through imaging and specialist assessment 
were not being achieved in practice.10
RAISING AWARENESS 
Despite being a malignant condition, 
prioritisation has not been given to 
improving understanding of heart failure Earlier heart failure diagnosis in primary careEditorials
4  British Journal of General Practice, January 2023“The British Heart Foundation has called for earlier 
diagnosis of heart failure to be prioritised, but what are 
the challenges for primary care?”
“Despite being a malignant condition, prioritisation has 
not been given to improving understanding of heart 
failure among the public.”among the public. Cancer awareness 
campaigns have successfully highlighted 
the symptoms of common cancers and 
a similar approach could be helpful in 
heart failure to encourage symptomatic 
patients to seek help. Inspired by the ‘FAST’ 
acronym for stroke, we created BEAT-HF 
— Breathless, Exhausted, Ankle Swelling, 
Time for a simple blood test12 — with the 
aim to raise awareness among the public, 
patients, and healthcare workers in 
primary and secondary care to consider a 
diagnosis of heart failure. The patient-led 
heart failure charity Pumping Marvellous 
Foundation is successfully leading the 
BEAT-HF campaign and we hope the 
acronym will be adopted more generally 
across the healthcare system.
ACHIEVING EARLIER DIAGNOSIS
Heart failure is a common, costly, 
yet treatable clinical syndrome; but 
while guidelines offer clear pathways 
for diagnosis, the complexity and 
multimorbidity of patients in primary 
care means the reality of the diagnostic 
journey is far more challenging. Changes across the patient pathway are required 
to prevent admissions to hospital and 
facilitate diagnosis at a more treatable 
stage. Greater public awareness of heart 
failure symptoms, clinicians considering 
the diagnosis in patients with new-onset 
or worsening breathlessness, increasing 
use of natriuretic peptide testing to 
inform decision making, investment in 
echocardiography capacity, and access 
to rapid diagnostic referral pathways are 
all needed to achieve earlier diagnosis in 
primary care.
Clare J Taylor, 
(ORCID: 0000-0001-8926-2581), GP and National 
Institute for Health and Care Research Academic 
Clinical Lecturer, Nuffield Department of Primary 
Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford.
Provenance
Commissioned; not externally peer reviewed. 
Competing interests
Clare J Taylor reports personal fees from Roche 
outside the submitted work.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp23X731481ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Clare J Taylor
Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, 
Radcliffe Primary Care Building, Radcliffe Observatory 
Quarter, University of Oxford, Woodstock Road, Oxford 
OX2 6GG, UK.
Email: clare.taylor@phc.ox.ac.uk 
@clarejtaylor
British Journal of General Practice, January 2023  5REFERENCES
1. National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence. Chronic heart failure in adults: 
diagnosis and management. NG106.  London: 
NICE, 2018. www.nice/org.uk/guidance/ng106 
(accessed 5 Dec 2022).
2. Bottle A, Kim D, Aylin P , et al . Routes to diagnosis 
of heart failure: observational study using linked 
data in England. Heart  2018; 104(7): 600–605.
3. British Heart Foundation. Heart failure: a 
blueprint for change.  https://www.bhf.org.uk/-/
media/files/health-intelligence/heart-failure-
a-blueprint-for-change.pdf (accessed 5 Dec 
2022).
4. Conrad N, Judge A, Tran J, et al . Temporal 
trends and patterns in heart failure incidence: a 
population-based study of 4 million individuals. 
Lancet  2018; 391(10120): 572–580.
5. Taylor CJ, Ordóñez-Mena JM, Roalfe AK, et 
al. Trends in survival after a diagnosis of heart 
failure in the United Kingdom 2000–2017: 
population based cohort study. BMJ  2019; 364:  
I223.
6. Vaduganathan M, Docherty KF, Claggett BL, 
et al . SGLT-2 inhibitors in patients with heart 
failure: a comprehensive meta-analysis of five 
randomised controlled trials. Lancet 2022; 
400(10354): 757–767.
7. Booth RA, Hill SA, Don-Wauchope A, et al . 
Performance of BNP and NT-proBNP for 
diagnosis of heart failure in primary care 
patients: a systematic review. Heart Fail Rev  
2014; 19(4): 439–451.
8. Taylor CJ, Ordóñez-Mena JM, Lay-Flurrie SL, et 
al. Natriuretic peptide testing and heart failure 
diagnosis in primary care: diagnostic accuracy 
study. Br J Gen Pract  2022; DOI: https://doi.
org/10.3399/BJGP.2022.0278.
9. Taylor CJ, Hobbs FD, Marshall T, et al . From 
breathless to failure: symptom onset and 
diagnostic meaning in patients with heart failure 
— a qualitative study. BMJ Open  2017; 7(3):  
e013648.
10. Hayhoe B, Kim D, Aylin PP , et al . Adherence 
to guidelines in management of symptoms 
suggestive of heart failure in primary care. Heart  
2019; 105(9): 678–685.
11. Roalfe AK, Lay-Flurrie SL, Ordóñez-Mena JM, et 
al. Long term trends in natriuretic peptide testing 
for heart failure in UK primary care: a cohort 
study. Eur Heart J  2021; 43(9): 881–891.
12. Taylor CJ, Hartshorne-Evans N, 
Satchithananda D, Hobbs FDR. FASTer 
diagnosis: time to BEAT heart failure. BJGP 
Open  2021; DOI: https://doi.org/10.3399/
BJGPO.2021.0006.“Inspired by the ‘FAST’ acronym for stroke, we created 
BEAT-HF — Breathless, Exhausted, Ankle Swelling, 
Time for a simple blood test — with the aim to raise 
awareness among the public, patients, and healthcare 
workers in primary and secondary care to consider a 
diagnosis of heart failure.”